The Beginning of the World

1 In the beginning, when God created the earth and sky,
2 the earth was without life and not yet useful for anything.
  Deep waters covered the earth, and darkness covered the water.
  God’s Spirit was moving like a storm over the surface of the water.

The First Day—Light

3 Then God said, "Let there be light!" And light began to shine.
4 He saw the light, and he knew that it was good. Then he separated the
  light from the darkness.
5 God named the light "day," and he named the darkness "night." There was
  evening, and then there was morning. This was the first day.

The Second Day—Sky

6 Then God said, "Let there be a space to separate the water into two parts!"
7 So God made the space and separated the water. Some of the water was above it,
  and some of the water was below it.
8 God named that space "sky." There was evening, and then there was morning.
  This was the second day.

The Third Day—Dry Land and Plants

9 Then God said, "Let the water under the sky be gathered together so that the
  dry land will appear." And it happened.
10 God named the dry land "earth," and he named the water that was gathered together
  "seas." And God saw that this was good.
11 Then God said, "Let the earth grow grass, plants that make grain, and fruit trees.
  The fruit trees will make fruit with seeds in it. And each plant will make its own kind
  of seed. Let these plants grow on the earth." And it happened.
12 The earth grew grass and plants that made grain. And it grew trees that made fruit
   with seeds in it. Every plant made its own kind of seeds. And God saw that this was good.
13 There was evening, and then there was morning. This was the third day.

The Fourth Day—Sun, Moon, and Stars

14 Then God said, "Let there be lights in the sky. These lights will separate the days
   from the nights. They will be used for signs to show when special meetings begin and to
   show the days and years.
15 They will be in the sky to shine light on the earth." And it happened.
16 So God made the two large lights. He made the larger light to rule during the day and
   the smaller light to rule during the night. He also made the stars.
17 God put these lights in the sky to shine on the earth.
18 He put them in the sky to rule over the day and over the night. They separated the light
   from the darkness. And God saw that this was good.
19 There was evening, and then there was morning. This was the fourth day.

The Fifth Day—Fish and Birds

20 Then God said, "Let the water be filled with many living things, and let there be birds
   to fly in the air over the earth."
21 So God created the large sea animals. He created all the many living things in the sea
   and every kind of bird that flies in the air. And God saw that this was good.
22 God blessed all the living things in the sea and told them to have many babies and fill
   the seas. And he blessed the birds on land and told them to have many more babies.
23 There was evening, and then there was morning. This was the fifth day.

The Sixth Day—Land Animals and People

24 Then God said, "Let the earth produce many kinds of living things. Let there be many
   different kinds of animals. Let there be large animals and small crawling animals of
   every kind. And let all these animals produce more animals." And all these things happened.
25 So God made every kind of animal. He made the wild animals, the tame animals, and all
   the small crawling things. And God saw that this was good.
26 Then God said, "Now let’s make humans who will be like us. They will rule over all
   the fish in the sea and the birds in the air. They will rule over all the large animals
   and all the little things that crawl on the earth."
27 So God created humans in his own image. He created them to be like himself. He created
   them male and female.
28 God blessed them and said to them, "Have many children. Fill the earth and take control
   of it. Rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the air. Rule over every living thing
   that moves on the earth."
29 God said, "I am giving you all the grain bearing plants and all the fruit trees. These
   trees make fruit with seeds in it. This grain and fruit will be your food.
30 And I am giving all the green plants to the animals. These green plants will be their food.
   Every animal on earth, every bird in the air, and all the little things that crawl on the
   earth will eat that food." And all these things happened.
31 God looked at everything he had made. And he saw that everything was very good.
   There was evening, and then there was morning. This was the sixth day.
